covered action in Chile 1963 to 1973
chapter for Chile authorization
assessment and oversight a 40 committee
authorization and control Chile 1969 to
1973 first 40 committee functions and
procedures throughout its history the 40
committee and its direct predecessors
the 303 committee and the special group
have had one overriding purpose to
exercise political control of recovered
operations abroad the 40 committee is
charged with considering the objectives
of any proposed activity whether or not
it would accomplish this aims and in
general whether or not it would be
proper and in the American interest
minutes and summaries of 40 committee
meetings on Chile indicate that by and
large this considerations were discussed
and occasionally debated by 40 committee
members in addition to exercising
political control the 40 committee has
been responsible for framing covered
operations in such a way that they could
later be disavowed or plausibly denied
by the United States government or at
least by the president in the case of
Chile of course this proved to be an
impossible task not only was CIA
involvement in Chile blown but in
September 1974 President Ford publicly
acknowledged at a press conference us
covered involvement in chile before
covered action proposals are presented a
director for submission to the 40
committee an internal CIA instruction
states that they should be coordinated
with the Department of State and that
ordinarily concurrence by the ambassador
to the country concerned is required
shoot an ordinary were underscored for
an important reason major covered action
proposals are not always coordinated
among the various agencies nor for that
matter are they always discussed and or
approved by the 40 committee the chilla
case demonstrates that in at least one
instance the so-called drag
activity the president instructed the
CIA not to inform or coordinate this
activity with the departments of state
or defense or the Ambassador in the
field nor was the 40 comity ever
informed not all cover activities are
approved by the 40 comity projects not
Dean politically risky or involving
large sums of money can be approved
within the CIA by CIA statistics only
about one-fourth of all covered
operation projects are considered by the
40 committee the committee has not been
able to determine what percentage of
covered action projects conducted by the
CIA in Chile were approved within the
CIA or required 40 committee
authorization despise suspect the
committee has found evidence of projects
not considered by the 40 committee thus
conforming to its general authorization
rule this is not to imply that the CIA
undertook activities in Chile behind the
back of that 40 committee or without its
approval the agency was simply following
the authorization procedures for covered
projects that then existed these same
procedures exist today there have been
numerous criticisms of 40 committee
procedures some of which follow the
criteria by which covered operations are
brought before the 40 committee appears
to be fussy the real degree of
accountability for covered action
remains to be determined there is a
basic conflict between sufficient
consultation to ensure accountability
and sound decisions on the one hand and
secure operations on the other the risk
of inadequate consultation may be
aggravated by the more informal
procedure of telephone clearances which
have been used by the 40 committee for
the last few years the review of covered
actions by the 40 committee does not
appear to be searching or thorough there
still appears to be our serious risk
that operations will end only when they
come to grief second 40 committee
approves according to a chronology of 40
committee meetings the committee met on
23 separate occasions between March
nineteen seventy in October 1973 to
authorize funds for cover activities in
Chile footnote number one the use of the
term 40 committee meetings must not be
taken in a literal sense at the outset
of the Nixon administration the 40
committee did meet frequently to discuss
and approve as well as review newest
covered activities however within a
relatively short period of times this
formal meetings of the 40 committee were
replaced by less frequent meetings and a
system of telephone clearances today the
40 committee rarely meets coverage
action proposals prepared by the DCI are
distributed to the various 40 comity
principles and approvals or disapproval
are obtained over the phone by the 40
comedy special group officer a CIA
officer on loan to the NSC staff and
footnote during this period the
committee authorized a total of eight
point eight million dollars for CIA
cover activities in Chile of this amount
6.5 million was spent the range of CIA
activities in Chile approved by the 40
committee included spoiling operations
against ind prior to the September 4th
election assistance to Chilean political
parties a contingency fund for
ambassador core is used to influence the
October 24 congressional vote purchase
of a Chilean radio to be used as a
political opposition instrument against
the yen d assistance to a specific
political candidate emergency aid to
keep the Santiago paper el mercurio
upload and support for anti agenda
businessman Association third policies
splits within the 40 committee unanimity
was not a hallmark of the 40 committee
meetings on Chile at least during the
period april nineteen sixty-nine to
October 1970 stated simply the State
Department was generally skeptical about
intervening in the Chilean electoral
process whereas the CIA the usms er to
Chile the Defense Department and the y
House favored intervention the question
of whether anything should be done with
regard to the September 1970
presidential election in Chile was first
raised at a meeting of the 303 Committee
on April fifteenth nineteen sixty-nine
it was not until December 1969 however
that I joined embassy CIA proposal for a
campaign directed against agenda was
submitted to the committee at this
December meeting to state Department
officials question they need for u.s.
involvement in the election once that
official commented that an A&F victory
would not be the same as a communist
victory the US ambassador to Chile
Edward Cory who have been recalled for
consultation disagreed he stated that
operationally one must treat an agenda
victory as the same thing as a communist
victory Cory went on to state that in
his view and again the government would
be worse than a Castro government on
March twenty-fifth nineteen seventy the
40 committee approved a spoiling
operation against agenda and approved
125 thousand dollars for this purpose
again however the State Department
represented by Under Secretary of State
you alexis johnson indicated that the
department remained look warm to any
involvement in the election and informed
the 40 committee that the department
would be quite cool to a more positive
approach one further example of policy
disagreement within the 40 committee was
evidence in a summary of a September 29
1970 40 committee meeting this meeting
occurred a little more than three weeks
after again they had won his plurality
victory on September fourth the question
of a pliant economic pressure to Chile
was raised with the hope that this
pressure would create the conditions
which would lead to a military coup
after a run through of possible economic
pressures that could be brought to bear
on Chile provided by the CIA's deputy
director for plans Thomas car messiness
Under Secretary of State Johnson noted
that to swerve from 40 comity type
action to economic warfare
was tantamount to a change in foreign
policy despite this concern the 40
comity did decide to increase economic
pressures in Chile the State Department
was not happy with this turn of events
assistant secretary of state's Charles
mayor remarked that should agenda beep
confirmed the US could place the burden
on agenda for all that he did and after
all it will not be around forever this
view was not accepted by the CIA
director Helms remarked at the meeting
that agendas marks his pronouncement
would be taken at face value while cara
messiness added that a hands-off policy
in chile at this time would be read as
the u.s. throwing in the sponge as
evidenced by later 40 committee
authorizations the sponge was not thrown
in be Intelligence Estimates and covered
action the intelligence community
produces several kinds of assessments
for policy makers of these the most
important our national intelligence
estimate and I es joint agreed
assessment of poor ian politics and
capabilities produced by the US
intelligence community this section
based on our review of n IES and other
intelligence memoranda footnote number
two these include intelligence memoranda
produced by the CIA's office of current
intelligence oci and intelligence note
produced by the State Department's
Bureau of intelligence and research I
and our and footnote regarding chiller
written during nineteen sixty nine to
nineteen seventy three will trace the
intelligence community's best estimate
of one agenda government signified for
us interest and I es are approved by the
United States intelligence board us I be
dissenting agencies can register food
notes prior to nineteen seventy three a
formal board of national estimates
supervise the production of drafts by a
special office of national estimates in
1973 the deck structure was replaced by
a system of national intelligence
officers
and iOS senior analysis drawn from the
CIA and other intelligence agencies
there have been persisting criticisms of
ant IES and many of these remain with a
new structure the documents our least
common denominator compromises and thus
are of little value to policymakers they
are oriented toward short range
predictions rather than long-run
assessment another criticism deals not
with the ni ease themselves but with our
use for abuse it is charged that
policymakers ignore and I es or consult
them only when estimates confirm their
pre-existing policy preferences first
the chili estimates between 1969 and
1973 five chili ni es were produced one
in each year in addition several
intelligence memoranda and intelligent
note relating to chile were prepared by
CIA and State the likely policies and
goals of an agendas administration as
predicted by the intelligence community
follow a chili under agenda July 1970
chili nie prepared a little of our month
before the sep tember election raised
the question of what an agenda victory
would mean to Chile and the United
States the NIE occasion considerable
disagreement within the Washington
community the disagreement reflected a
division between the Department of State
on one side and the US ambassador and
the CIA station on the other the later
position was that an agenda victory
would mean the gradual imposition of a
classic marxist-leninist regime in Chile
this position was reflected with some
qualifier remarks in the NIE the 1917
and I stated in strong terms that an IND
administration would proceed as rapidly
as possible toward the establishment of
Marxist socialist state it would be a
Chilean version of a soviet-style East
European communist state the
intelligence community predicted that
although democracy was likely to survive
chili over the next two or three years
again that could take chili a long way
down the Marxist socialist road during
the six years of his administration to
do this however it would have to
surmount some very important obstacles
such as Chile security forces the
Christian Democratic Party some elements
of organized labor the Congress and the
catalog search the NIE noted the agenda
undoubtedly expected progress on basic
bread and butter issues which would
afford him an opportunity to secure
control of the Congress in the nineteen
seventy three election and thereby
enable him to impose a socialist state
of the Marxist variety by the BIA
pacifica peaceful road the next and ie
issued on Chile in a cos 1971 was less
shrill on the thread which agenda
represented to Chilean democracy he had
been in office nine months the NIE
stated that the consolidation of Marxist
political leadership in Chile was not
inevitable and that again they had a
long hard way to go to achieve this the
NIE warned however the agenda would
almost certainly prefer to adhere to
constitutional means he was likely to be
impelled to use political techniques of
increasingly dubious legality to
perpetuate his coalition and power up to
that point the NIE observed again they
had taken great care to observe
constitutional forms and was enjoying
considerable popularity in Chile the
next nie came out in june nineteen
seventy-two the prospects for the
continuation of democracy in chile
appeared to be better that any time
since agendas inauguration the NIE
stated that the traditional political
system in chile continued to demonstrate
remarkable resiliency legislative
student and trade union elections
continue to take place in normal fashion
with pro-government forces accepting the
results what they were adverse the nie
noted that the Christian Democratic
Party and the National Party had used
their combined control of both houses
of Congress to start government
initiatives and to pass legislation
designed to curtail agendas powers in
addition the opposition news media had
been able to resist government
intimidation and persisted in turn aus
in the government the NIE concluded that
the most likely course of events in
Chile for the next year or so would be
the moves by ended two were slow with
the pace of this revolution in order to
accommodate the opposition and to
preserve the gains he had already made
one final nie on Chile was issued prior
two agendas overthrow in September 1973
that nie focused on the prospects for
the consolidation of power by again this
region it concluded that at the juncture
of political standoff seemed to be the
most likely course of events in Chile
the NIE stated that again they had not
consolidated the power of his marxist
regem the bulk of low-income chile ins
believed that he have improved their
condition and represented their interest
and the growth in support for his
coalition reflected his political
ability as well as the popularity of his
measures the end IE did warn however
that the growing polarization of Chilean
Society was wearing away the Chilean
predilection for political compromise
nevertheless the analysts predicted that
there was only an outside chance that
the military would move to force agenda
from office beam us Chilean relations
almost two years before again they were
selected the intelligence community
predicted that future us Chilean
relations would be under repeated
strains regardless of which party won
the 1970 presidential election I 1969
and ie stated that whoever succeeded
frey in the presidency was likely to
continue to stress Chilean independence
to be less cooperative with the u.s.
than frey had men and to explore
somewhat broader relations with
communist countries this n IE noted that
where I ended to win his administration
would almost certainly take steps
moving Chile away from the US the NIE
also observed that steps toward either
government participation in or outright
nationalization of us copper holdings in
Chile were inevitable a nineteen seventy
nie issued one month before a Yenta
September victory was quite pessimistic
about the future us Chilean relations it
stated that if agenda were to win the
election it would almost certainly take
hearts measured against us business
interest in Chile and challenge us
policies in the hemisphere the NIE
sitted several foreign policy problems
on agenda regime with pose for the u.s.
include a recognition of Cuba possible
withdrawal from the OAS the
deterioration of relations with
Argentina and anti-us votes in the
United Nations the NIE predicted however
that again they would probably not seek
a break with the United States over the
next two years a 1971 and ie issued ten
months into a yen disturbing office
stated that US Chilean relations were
dominated by the problems of
nationalization although agenda himself
seemed to wish to avoid a confrontation
a 1972 chilla n IE noted that a yen day
to date had sought to avoid irreparable
damage to his relations with Washington
another major problem concerning us
chilly relations continue to be that of
compensation for the nationalization of
US companies the 1972 nie stated that a
yen they had taken pains to publish see
stress his desire for amicable relations
a 1973 and ie concluded that again they
had kept lines open to Washington
impossible Chilean compensation for
expropriated us copper companies seem
agendas relation with socialist
countries the nineteen sixty-nine Chile
nie predicted that any new
administration would explore somewhat
broader relation with communist and
socialist countries the end IE noted
that again
in particular would take such steps but
the hay would be deterred from moving
too far in this direction due to a
Chilean nationalism which would strongly
oppose subordinating Chile to the
tutelage of Moscow or Havana as to
Washington addenda did over the years
expand Chile's relations with socialist
and communist countries however again
there was as a 1971 nie stated careful
not to subordinate chillin interest to
any communist or socialist power or to
break existing ties with non communist
nations on whom he continued to rely for
aid Chile ni es in 1971 in 1972
emphasized that agenda was charging an
independent nationalistic course both
within the hemisphere and
internationally agenda was in short
committed to a policy of non-alignment
Dean agendas ties with Cuba the 1970 and
I e on Chile predicted that I end they
would recognize Cuba he did so shortly
after he was inaugurated however the
pattern of Chile and cuban relations was
described in a 1971 nie as one of
ideological distance and closer economic
ties the NIE stated that despite agendas
long-standing personal relationship with
Castro he had refrained from excessive
overtures to them a 1972 nie noted that
Havana had been circumspect about trying
to use chili as a base for prompting
revolution throughout Latin America II
Soviet influence in Chile concern about
expansion of Soviet influence in Chile
under agenda was the possible
establishment of major Soviet military
present was expressed in nineteen
seventy a 1971 nie predicted and after
the Soviet Union would continue to
cultivate channels of influence in two
agendas government throughout the
Chilean Communist Party it would
probably be ensured of its ability to
make a decisive imp
act on key issues given agendas desire
for an independent posture the same nie
noted that neither agenda nor the
Chilean military establishment would
probably tolerate a permanent Soviet
military presence in Chile a 1972 chili
n IE focused on the Soviet attitude to
the agenda regime and noted that Soviet
overtures to agenda had thus far been
characterized by caution and restraint
this was in part due to Soviet
reluctance to antagonize the US and more
importantly a Soviet desire to avoid
with agenda the type of open-ended
commitment for aid that they had entered
into with Castro a 1972 intelligence
note prepared by the State Department
stated that a Soviet Chilean communic
issued following agendas December visit
to the US as are reflected Moscow
decision to continue a conscious policy
towards Chile and to avoid a major
open-ended commitment of a to agenda
according to the intelligence note the
Soviet apparently advise it addendum to
negotiate his difference with the u.s. f
Chile has a wait for Latin America
subversion prior to agenda selection
concern was expressed about chili and
subversion in other countries an
intelligence memorandum prepared by the
CIA and issued shortly after Enda
September for plurality victory stated
that Chile had long been a relatively
open country for extreme leftist and
would become even more so under agenda
the memorandum noted however that agenda
would be cautious and provide an
assistant to extremist fourth year of
provoking a military reaction in his own
country the memorandum went on to
observe the degree to which
revolutionary groups would be allowed to
use chili as a base of operations would
be limited to some extent by the
Orthodox Communist Party in Chile which
opposed violence-prone groups a State
Department intelligence note prepared in
June 1971 stated that contrary to some
earlier indications that
they might provide clandestine assistant
to neighboring insurgency movement
evidence to date suggested that he had
been sensitive to the concerns of
neighboring government and had sought to
avoid action which would strain
bilateral relations the intelligence
nodes stated that Chile had warned
Argentine and Mexican expatriates that
they would reside in Chile only if they
did not engage in political activities
and that some of the more politically
active Brazilian exiles had been
encouraged to the poor Chile the note
concluded but predicting that it was
unlikely that agenda would provide
financial support or training to
facilitate the export of insurgency a
1972 and ie stated that again they had
gone to great lengths to convince his
Latin American neighbors that he did not
share Castro's revolutionary goals
although some revolutionaries in Chile
had received arm and funds from
extremists in agendas political
coalition this had probably not occurred
as it behest Jean threat assessment the
most direct statement concerned the
thread and again the regime would pose
to the United States was contained in a
CIA intelligence memorandum issued
shortly after agenda September for the
election victory the memorandum
summarized the views of the
interdepartmental group for inter
American affairs which prepared the
response to national security study
memorandum 97 the group made up of
officials representing CIA State Defense
and the White House concluded that the
United States had no vital interest
within Chile the world military balance
of power will not be significantly
altered by an agenda regime and an
agenda victory in Chile would not pose
any likely threat to the Peace of the
region the group noted however that an
agenda victory would threaten
hemispheric question and will represent
a psychological setback to the US as
well as a definite advance for the
Marxist idea second estimates and
covered action as
result of this look at the chilly
estimates a number of comments can be
made concerning them and their relation
to decisions about covered action a
despite the view expressed by the
interdepartmental group and reported in
a CIA intelligence memorandum that the
u.s. had no vital national interest in
Chile the decision was made by the
executive branch to intervene in that
nation's internal political and economic
affairs before the election between it
and the congressional boat and during
agendas Turner in office it appears that
the chilla ni es were either at best
selectively used or at worst disregarded
by policymakers when the time came to
make decisions regarding us covered
involvement in Chile 40 committee
decisions regarding Chile reflected
great concern about the internal and
international consequences of an agendas
government that was reflected in the
Intelligence Estimate at the same time
as the chili ni es were becoming less
shrill the 40 committee authorized
greater amount of money for cover
operations in chilling the amount
authorized by the 40 committee rose from
1.5 million dollars in 1972 3.6 million
dollars in 1971 2.5 million dollars in
1972 and during the first eight months
of 1973 1.2 million dollars covered
action decisions were not in short
entirely consistent with Intelligence
Estimate be as noted an IES are designed
to provide economic and political
assessment and an analysis of trends as
such there are vulnerable to being
interpreted by policymakers to support
whatever conclusion the policymakers
wish to draw from them the estimates do
however serve to narrow the range of
uncertainty about future events in Chile
and thus narrow the range of justifiable
US policies but a range remained for
example a 1971 estimate stated that on
the one hand
Enda was moving skillfully and
confidently toward his declared goal of
building a revolutionary nationalistic
socialist society on marks his
principles but on the other hand the
consolidation of Marxist political
leadership in Chile was not inevitable
and again they had a long hard way to go
to achieve this as a further example a
1973 and ie which addressed the
possibility of enhance Soviet influence
in Chile stated that Soviets were
interest both in increasing their
influence in South America and an agenda
successful coalition of lessys party as
a model for marxist revolution through
election yet the estimate went on to say
that the Soviets did not want another
Cuba on their hands and they were
reluctant to antagonize the US and see
the committee have determined that the
analysis responsible for drawing up the
chili ni es would not privy to
information concerning covered
operations approved by the 40 committee
and being implemented in chile by the
CIA operators the explanation for this
is CIA comfort Sam entation analysis and
operators after exist in separate world
information available to the operation
Directorate is not always available in
the intelligence Directorate as a result
those who were responsible for preparing
and I es on Chile appear to not have
access to certain information we could
have added to our substantially revised
their assessments and predictions that
flaw was telling it meant for example
that the 1972 assessment of the
durability of oppositional sectors was
written without knowledge of covered
American funding of precisely those
sectors thus there was no estimate of
whether those sectors would survive
absent us money see congressional
oversight with regard to cover action in
Chile between april nineteen sixty four
and december 1974 CIA's consultation
with his congressional oversight
committees and thus congress exercise of
its oversight
function was inadequate the CIA did not
volunteer detailed information Congress
must often did not seek it beginning in
1973 numerous public allegations were
made concerning activities undertaken by
the CIA in Chile in response Congress
began to assume greater control in the
exercise of its oversight function which
had badly neglected in the past both in
the number and depth of consultations
with the Central Intelligence Agency
prior to nineteen seventy three their
120 meetings between congressional
committees and the CIA regarding Chile
these meetings were held with the House
and Senate Armed Services an
appropriation committees in their
intelligence of committees from March
1973 to December 1974 there were 13
meetings held not only with this
committees but also before the Senate
Foreign Relations Subcommittee on
multinational corporations and the House
Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on inter
American affairs based on CIA records
the word total of 53 CIA congressional
briefings on Chile between 1964 in 1974
at thirty one of these meetings there
was some discussion of covert action
special releases of funds for cover
action was discussed at 23 of them after
January 1973 these briefings were
concerned with pass CIA covert activity
from information currently in the
position of the committee and public
sources several tentative conclusions
emerged on several important occasions
the CIA did not respond on covered
action until quite long after the fact
and in one case dragged to it emitted
discussion of an important closely held
operation reverberated on the foreign
policy of the United States and carrot
implications for domestic affairs as
well of the 33 covered action projects
undertaken in Chile with 40 committee
approval during the period 1973 to 1974
Congress was
in some fashion on 8 footnote number
three under Section six to two of
foreign assistance act of 1974 the
director of Central Intelligence is
required to notify six congressional
oversights committee of every 40
committee approval once the president
has issued a finding that the project is
necessary for the national security of
the United States and footnote
presumably the 25 others were undertaken
without congressional consultation this
25 projects included that 102 million
dollars authorization in 1971 help of
which was spent to purchase radio
station and newspapers while the other
half went to support municipal
candidates and anti agenda political
parties and the additional expenditure
of eight hundred and fifteen thousand
dollars in late nineteen seventy one to
provide support to opposition parties of
the total of over 13 million dollars
actual spent by the CIA uncovered action
operations in Chile in 1963 in 1974
Congress received some kind of briefing
sometimes before sometimes after the
fact on projects totaling about 7.1
million dollars further congressional
oversight committees were not consulted
about projects which were not reviewed
by the full 40 committee one of these
were the track to attempt deferment a
military coup in 1970 the other a later
CIA project involving contacts with
Chilean military officers was an
intelligence collection project and thus
did not come before the 40 committee
even though in this instance the
political importance of the project was
clear